I am a doctor of technical sciences, certified business coach, a partner of ZGroup training company.
I have experience of practical work on implementation of projects of introduction of electronic operating systems of companies,
consulting projects, development of personnel training program and production of software.
The topic of our meeting today is conflicts and stress.
Modern organization can be classified as complex probability system,
that is, it has a number of subsystems, between which contradictions may arise.
They are an inevitable attribute of such systems.
It should be noted that there are no organizations without conflicts.
Moreover, the more active and dynamic the organization,
the more often there are grounds for big and small conflicts in its activity.
Therefore, it is essential to understand the origins of the conflict and to be able to manage it
with the flow and resolution of the integral component of the professionalism of the leader.
During the study of the first part of the course, you will learn about the reasons, types and consequences of conflicts.
The second part of the course is dedicated to managing conflicts.
You will get acquainted with direct and indirect methods of managing conflicts,
negotiation technologies, learn about methods of fighting organizational stress.
The third part of the course is dedicated to the functions and effectiveness of the conflict.
As a result of performing practical tasks and solving cases,
you will get the skills of solving conflict situations, skills of preparation for negotiations,
and with the help of the test you will be able to identify and correct your behavior in conflict situations.
The role of conflicts and their regulation in modern society is so great
that in the second half of the 20th century a special field of knowledge was allocated – conflictology.
According to its role, the leader of an organization is usually in the center of any conflict
and is designed to solve it with all available means.
Managing conflicts is one of the most important functions of a leader,
for which he spends up to 20% of his working time.
Each manager must know about conflicts, ways of behavior when they arise,
means and methods of preventing them and resolving them.
Psychologists under the conflict understand the collision of opposite goals,
interests, positions, opinions or views of opponents or subjects of interaction.
In this regard, it is possible to define a conflict as one of the forms of human interaction,
based on which various real or illusory, objective and subjective,
to varying degrees conscious contradictions between people lie,
with attempts of their resolution against the background of emotions.
It is clear from this that the basis of conflict situations in a group between individuals
is a collision between opposite interests, opinions, goals,
various ideas about the way of their achievement.
The authors of the schools of scientific management, administrative school
and the concept of bureaucracy by choice believed that the efficiency of an organization
is mostly based on determining tasks, procedures, rules, interaction of officials
and development of a rational organizational structure.
And it is these mechanisms that eliminate the conditions that contribute to the manifestation of conflict
and can be used to solve the emerging problems.
The authors belonging to the school of human relations were also inclined to believe
that a conflict can and should be avoided.
They recognized the possibility of a contradiction between different groups of leaders.
However, they usually considered a conflict as a sign of the inefficiency of the organization's activity
and poor management.
One of the founders of the Chekar school of social psychology, Park,
included a conflict as one of the four basic types of social interaction
along with competition, adaptation and assimilation, that is, a type of change.
From his point of view, competition, which is a social form of struggle for existence,
being conscious, turns into a conflict, which, thanks to assimilation,
is intended to lead to strong mutual contacts and cooperation.
American sociologist Kozer defines a conflict as an ideological phenomenon
reflecting the aspiration and feelings of individuals and social groups
in the struggle for objective goals, such as power, status change, redistribution of income,
revaluation of values, and so on.
The value of conflicts is that they prevent the system from getting tired,
open the way to innovation.
A conflict, as a social action, undoubtedly gives a well-known,
vividly colored negative effect.
But it performs an important and positive function.
A conflict serves as an expression of dissatisfaction or protest,
informing the conflicting parties about their interests and needs.
In certain situations, when negative relations between people are controlled,
and at least one of the parties defends not only personal, but also organizational interests in general,
conflicts help to unite with others,
to mobilize will, mind, to solve fundamentally important issues,
to improve the moral and psychological climate in the collective.
Moreover, there are situations when a clash between the members of the collective,
an open and fundamental dispute, is desirable.
It is better to warn the wrong behavior of a colleague in time,
than to let him go, not to react, fearing to spoil the relationship.
So, there are two main approaches to conflict.
They are reflected on the next slide.
In the framework of the first approach,
a conflict is defined as a clash of interests,
a contradiction, a struggle and a confrontation.
From the position of the second approach,
a conflict is considered as a process of development of interaction.
Representatives of the first approach recommend to put an end to conflicts.
Representatives of the second approach believe that a conflict blockade is worse than a conflict itself,
and the conflict itself has a number of invaluable advantages
from the point of view of the development of the organization.
The next topic is the causes of conflicts.
The basis of any conflict is a contradiction,
which usually leads to constructive,
for example, to the strengthening of the group dynamics, the development of the collective,
or to destructive, for example, to the collapse of the collective.
An open conflict is most often developed on a business basis,
and a hidden and a blurring conflict is associated with human relationships.
Many seemingly business conflicts are actually conflicts
that are involved in feelings and relationships of its participants.
It is very important to determine the causes of the conflict,
because knowing the causes of the emergence of a particular conflict phenomenon,
it is easier to take specific steps to block their actions,
thereby preventing the negative effect caused by them.
Let's consider a list of causes of a conflict.
It can be presented in terms of three main groups of causes.
First, the causes caused by the labor process.
Second, the causes caused by psychological features of human relationships.
And third, the causes rooted in the personal nature of the members of the collective.
There are also causes of conflict caused by the economic state of life in our country,
which cannot be ignored.
Let's consider the first group of causes caused by the labor process.
For many labor groups,
they are the main source of conflict situations.
First, conflicts are caused by factors
that hinder the achievement of the main goal of labor activity,
that is, the obtaining of certain products.
Such factors can be
the direct technological interrelationship of workers,
when the actions of one of them negatively affect the effectiveness of the actions of the other,
for example, when working on a conveyor belt.
The transfer of problems,
the solution of which should have been to go vertically to the horizontal level of the relationship.
For example, a lack of equipment and tools
often leads to conflicts between the workers.
Although it is not they who should solve this problem, but their managers.
The next group of causes is the non-fulfillment of functional duties in the system of leadership.
For example, the manager does not provide the appropriate conditions for the successful activity of the subordinates,
or vice versa, the subordinates do not fulfill the appropriate requirements of the manager.
Secondly, conflicts in production are caused by factors
that hinder the achievement of secondary goals of labor activity,
a fairly high income, favorable working and rest conditions.
This group of factors is related to
the interrelationship of people,
when the achievement of goals of one of them depends on the other members of the collective.
Secondly, the insolvency of a number of organizational issues in the vertical,
that is, the leadership,
as a result of which there may be an exacerbation of the relationship between people
located on the organizational horizontal.
And finally, functional violations in the system of leadership,
which hinder the achievement of personal goals of both the leader and the subordinate.
Thirdly, conflicts arising in the process of the implementation of labor activity
are often caused by the inconsistency of the actions of a person
adopted by the norm and life values in his collective.
Or another similar conflict reason
is role inconsistencies in the system of leadership.
For example, when there is a place of inconsistency of the expectations
of people who occupy certain positions in the collective
with their real actions.
That is, it seems that a person is not coping with his duties.
And finally, the reasons caused by the psychological features of human relations.
The most striking example of this kind of features
is mutual sympathy and antipathy of people
leading to their compatibility or incompatibility.
It would seem that a rather harmless factor,
sympathy-antipathy,
concerns only two or a few more people,
but it can have more serious consequences for the whole collective.
After all, often different kinds of personnel appointments at enterprises
are based on this very principle.
In turn, the injustice of official appointments,
as a rule, is due to exacerbation of interpersonal relations.
Several more reasons for such conflicts can be highlighted.
This is an unfavorable psychological atmosphere in the collective,
which can be caused by the formation of opposing groups,
cultural and aesthetic differences of people,
actions of the leader, and so on.
And bad psychological communication.
That is, people do not understand, do not take into account the intentions,
the state of each other,
do not consider each other's needs.
In psychology, the concept of territoriality is also used,
which implies the occupation of a Personality or a group of a certain space
and the establishment of control over it and the objects or objects in it.
Moreover, it is customary to highlight group and individual territoriality.
With the appearance of territoriality,
we often encounter in everyday life,
including at work.
People who join a particular working group
occupy a certain territory,
a working space or a rest room,
and the occupation of it by other members of the group or by members of another group
is often surrounded by intergroup clashes.
In the same way, each member of the group occupies a part of the common space
together with the objects there.
Without enthusiasm, they are prone to invasion.
For example, having our own desk,
it is unlikely that we will be happy to find someone else's work during a meeting.
If such a situation occurs again,
it can cause irritation and conflict.
The reasons for the conflict rooted in the personal nature of the members of the group
should also be considered.
In this case, I mean possible personal features
leading to conflict situations.
This is the inability to control one's emotional state,
low self-esteem,
aggressiveness, increased anxiety,
excessive principle or incommunicability.
Demographic characteristics also play an important role in this process.
According to the research, for women,
there is a characteristic tendency to have more conflicts
related to their personal needs,
such as salary, distribution of vacations.
Men are more prone to conflicts
related to their work activities,
that is, the organization of work,
the determination of work functions.
With the increase in the age of workers,
conflicts related to the purposeful characteristics of their activities are taken into account.
At the same time, the number of conflicts caused by the problems
of adapting workers in the working group,
such as violation of the labor discipline or discomfort with the requirements, is reduced.
So, the main reasons for the conflict are
1. Distribution of resources.
Resources are always limited in an organization,
and the management must decide how to distribute materials,
information, human resources and finances between different groups
in order to achieve the goals of the organization in the most effective way.
People, as a rule, take their problems closer
and always want to get more, not less.
The need to share resources almost inevitably leads to various kinds of conflicts.
2. The difference in goals.
Specialized units of the organization and even subgroups
form their own goals,
bear responsibility for their achievements
and receive a payment for the final result.
Therefore, the units can pay more attention to their achievements
than to the goals of the whole organization.
The difference in goals is often seen between the person and the group.
3. The next reason is the interdependence of tasks.
The possibility of a conflict exists everywhere,
where one person or group depends on the performance of a task
from another person or group.
The reason for the conflict, as a rule, is that
neither the function, nor the means, nor the duties,
nor the power, nor the responsibility are clearly distributed
among the units and workplaces.
4. The next reason is the difference in ideas and values.
The difference in values is a very common cause of conflict.
Instead of objectively assessing the situation,
people focus on those views, alternatives and aspects of the situation
that, in their opinion, are favorable for the group and personal needs.
5. The next reason is unsatisfactory communication.
It can act as a catalyst for conflict,
preventing individual workers or groups
from understanding the situation or from the point of view of others.
The common problems of information transmission causing conflict
are ambiguous quality criteria,
inability to accurately determine the duties and functions
of all employees and units,
as well as the presentation of mutually exclusive requirements for work.
These problems can arise if they are deepened
due to the inability of the leaders to develop and provide the information
of the subordinates with an accurate description of the duties.
Poor information transmission is also a consequence of the conflict.
Thus, the level of communication between its participants decreases,
wrong ideas about each other begin to form,
hostile relations develop.
All this leads to the intensification and continuation of the conflict.
6. The next reason is the imbalance of jobs.
It is a frequent source of conflict in the organization.
Such a conflict develops if the duties are not fully supported
by the means, rights and power.
7. The next reason is the wrong control.
Control during management should not be dictated by suspicion.
If the management uses uncertain and total control,
then in such a situation a person constantly feels guilty
and, in the end, loses self-control,
and because of nervousness, he really starts to work worse.
8. The next reason is the difference in the manner of behavior and life experience.
Studies show that all employees,
depending on their adherence to conflicts,
can be divided into three groups.
1. Aggressive groups.
The number of the last group is about 6-7% of the entire staff.
Among the difficult people, five types of insatiable calm stand out.
First of all, aggressive.
They are divided into three subtypes.
These are tanks, snipers and bombers.
Tanks are absolutely sure that their advice is the most competent.
The only thing they don't like is the aggressive reactions from those they communicate with.
To achieve any success in a dispute with tanks,
they need to be given the opportunity to release steam.
Snipers shoot at people with various sharpness and acuity,
and thus cause discomfort in the collective actions of the staff.
The most effective way to influence them
is to demand a detailed explanation of what they mean by one or another of their acuity.
Bombers are the types that attack the opponent with armor,
while artistically coming out of themselves,
so that it seems as if they were strongly offended.
They need to let the accumulated emotions spill out of them.
The next type is the complainants.
These people describe their troubles so vividly
that the listener often has doubts in their favor.
The best thing to do in such cases
is to paraphrase the complaints in your own words,
making it clear that their experiences are noticed.
The next type is the indecisive.
People of this type take so many test steps
before doing anything that they cause irritation in others.
The indecisive avoid those who put pressure on them.
They do the things they are forced to do without enthusiasm.
The next type is the irresponsible.
To some extent, these are anxious personalities,
and their anxiety does not cause them to leave the conflict, but aggression.
And if they feel warm towards themselves,
their behavior, as it were, will naturally enter the framework.
And the next type is the all-knowing.
They are essentially valuable workers,
but they behave in such a way that
only the feeling of inferiority is caused by others.
It should be remembered that they rarely agree to admit their mistakes.
And the last two reasons for conflict that I would like to note.
This is the lack of respect for the leadership.
If most employees feel that the style and management methods
do not meet the practical needs,
this can be the cause of a conflict situation.
The dissatisfaction with the level of the manager's business or management competence
has a great demotivating potential.
It is obviously important to know that the staff is waiting for their leaders
and draw the appropriate conclusions from this.
And the last reason is insufficient motivation.
If it is possible to achieve a coincidence of the needs of individuals with the needs of the organization,
it is clear that the staff will be laid out to satisfy these needs,
which will not provide any compulsion.
Remember Peter Drucker and his management of goals.
Therefore, the necessary signs of conflict are the presence of contradictory goals,
directions of movement or intentions, and the presence of conflicting sides,
that is, subjects capable of activity, not just behavior.
Accordingly, conflict activity consists in such a transformation of the environment
or in the impact on it, which allows one of the conflicting sides
to achieve his goal or move in the chosen direction.
The next topic is the types of conflicts.
In social psychology, there is a multidimensional typology of conflict
depending on the criteria that are taken as the basis.
Two forms of conflicts that occur in everyday workplaces can be identified.
A significant conflict is a fundamental disagreement
regarding the goals or tasks set, as well as the means of their achievement.
A dispute with the boss about the plan of further actions,
for example, a marketing strategy for a new product, is an example of a significant conflict.
The most frequent disagreements arise regarding group or organizational goals,
placement of resources, distribution of rewards, policies and procedures,
as well as appointments for work.
An emotional conflict implies interpersonal problems
resulting from a feeling of anger, distrust, displeasure, fear, indignation.
Such a conflict is a clash of characters.
People's energy is spent on emotional conflicts.
They distract them from important work tasks.
Emotional conflicts can arise in a wide variety of situations
in relations between colleagues and between bosses and subordinates.
The last type of conflict is probably the most difficult organizational conflict for a person experiencing it.
Speaking of the levels of conflicts, it should be noted that people at work
may experience an interpersonal conflict or face conflicts at the intergroup or interorganizational level.
Interpersonal conflicts are clashes within the personality
equal in strength, but opposite motives, needs or interests.
A conflict of the type of approach has place in those cases
when a person has to choose between two positive and equally attractive alternatives.
An example is a choice between getting a higher position in one organization
or a new job in another company.
A conflict of the type of avoidance is observed when a person has to choose
between two negative and equally unattractive alternatives.
An example is a situation when a person has to either agree to transfer to another job,
to another city or to leave the job.
A conflict of the type of approach has place in those cases
when a person has to decide on something that will have both positive and negative consequences.
An example is a proposal of a higher paid job
coupled with higher personal time costs.
An interpersonal conflict occurs between two or more individuals
who are in opposition to each other.
It can be significant, emotional or both at the same time.
Two people fiercely arguing with each other about the benefit of hiring a consultant
is an example of a significant interpersonal conflict.
Two people who are constantly arguing about what kind of clothes to wear to work
is an illustration of an emotional interpersonal conflict.
A conflict between an individual and a group can arise
if this individual occupies a position that differs from the position of the group.
For example, discussing at a meeting the way to increase the volume of sales,
the majority will believe that this can be achieved by reducing the price.
And someone will be convinced that such a tactic will lead to a decrease in profit.
Although this person, whose opinion differs from the opinion of the group,
can take the interests of the company close to his heart,
but still he can be considered as a source of conflict
because he is against the opinion of the group.
An intergroup conflict is a conflict between organizations consisting of many formal and informal groups.
Even in the best organizations, conflicts can arise between such groups.
Informal groups, which believe that the leader treats them unfairly,
can get together more tightly and try to settle the issue by reducing productivity.
A vivid example of an intergroup conflict is a conflict between a trade union and an administration.
Interorganizational conflicts are best considered from the point of view of competition and rivalry,
characterizing the activities of companies on the same market.
But an interorganizational conflict can be much deeper than competition on the market.
For example, the disagreement between trade unions and organizations
that employ their members, between government institutions and organizations under their supervision,
between manufacturers and those who supply them with raw materials.
The classification of conflicts depends on a number of factors.
The method of their resolution, the nature of the occurrence,
the consequences for the participants, the degree of expressiveness, the number of participants.
Antagonistic conflicts are resolutions of contradiction
in the form of destruction of the structures of all conflicting parties
or refusal of all parties except one from participating in the conflict.
This one party wins.
Compromising conflicts allow several options for their resolution
due to mutual change of the goal of the participants of the conflict,
deadlines, conditions of interaction.
For example, the supplier does not deliver the ordered product to the manufacturer on time
due to the lack of funds for the last shipment.
The factory has the right to require the execution of the delivery schedule,
but the conditions have changed for the partner.
Perhaps, with such mutual interest, it is possible to achieve a compromise,
that is, to change the delivery schedule,
to help with the loan, to enter into negotiations.
In terms of direction, conflicts are divided into horizontal, vertical and mixed.
A characteristic feature of vertical and horizontal conflicts
is the volume of power that the opponents have
at the time of the beginning of the conflict interaction.
Vertical conflicts imply the distribution of power vertically from top to bottom,
which determines the different starting conditions of the participants of the conflict.
The boss is a subordinate, the higher organization is an enterprise,
the small enterprise is an instigator.
Horizontal conflicts imply the interaction of subjects
of equal volume of power or hierarchical level,
leaders of the same level, specialists among themselves, suppliers-consumers.
Open conflicts are characterized by a clearly expressed collision of opponents.
Quarrels, disputes, military clashes.
Interaction is regulated by the norms corresponding to the situation
and level of the conflict participants.
International, in the case of interstate clashes, legal, social, ethical.
An open conflict arose between the heroes of the case
and the master-boss, who you will find in the workbook.
In a hidden conflict, there are no external aggressive actions
between the conflicting parties,
but indirect methods of interaction are used.
This happens on the condition that one of the participants of the conflict interaction
is afraid of another, or he does not have enough power and strength for an open fight.
The most common conflicts are vertical and mixed.
They are on average 70-80% of all others.
The division of conflicts into types is quite conditional.
There is no rigid border between different types,
and in practice there are conflicts of organizational, vertical, interpersonal,
horizontal, open, intergroup, and so on.
Conflicts differ in their importance for the organization,
as well as the method of their resolution.
Constructive and destructive conflicts are different.
A functional or constructive conflict leads to positive consequences
for individuals, groups, or organizations.
A conflict is able to identify a problem,
and this makes its solution possible.
Due to a conflict, all possible solutions to the problem
can be carefully considered,
as well as a revision,
which guarantees the accuracy of the plan.
A conflict can increase the amount of information
used to make a decision.
Moreover, it offers new opportunities for creative execution
of the work of an individual, a group of people, or the whole organization.
A constructive conflict is useful in situations
when a sense of satisfaction with the current situation
slows down the necessary changes and evolution.
A dysfunctional or destructive conflict
leads to losses at the level of an individual, group, or organization.
Energy is spent on it in vain.
It violates the unity of the group,
generates enmity between people,
and creates a general negative atmosphere at work.
This happens, for example, when two employees are not able to work side by side
due to interpersonal differences.
This is a destructive emotional conflict.
Or when they are unable to act
due to the fact that they cannot reach an agreement
on the goals of their group.
This is a destructive significant conflict.
Destructive conflicts of this type
can reduce the productivity of work
and the sense of satisfaction from the work,
contribute to the increase of work hours and the flow of personnel.
The consequences of conflicts can be functional and dysfunctional.
The following consequences relate to the functional consequences of a conflict.
The first problem can be solved in a way
that is acceptable to all parties.
As a result, people will feel their involvement in solving the problem,
which is a motivating factor.
This will help to eliminate or reduce
the difficulty in making decisions.
The second functional positive consequence
can be that parties will be more open to cooperation,
and not to antagonism in future situations,
fraught with conflicts.
The conflict can also reduce the possibility of a syndrome of obedience,
when employees do not express ideas
that, as they believe, contradict the opinion of the boss.
This leads to an improvement in the process of making decisions.
And finally, through a conflict,
members of the group can work out possible problems in execution
even before the decision is made.
Let's talk about the dysfunctional consequences of a conflict.
First of all, this is dissatisfaction,
a bad state of mind,
an increase in the flow of personnel and a decrease in productivity.
A dysfunctional conflict can lead to less cooperation in the future.
Strong loyalty to one group
and more unproductive competition with other groups
are also the dysfunctional consequences of a conflict.
An idea of the other side as an enemy,
an idea of ​​one's goals as positive,
and of the goals of the other side as negative
can also have a negative impact on the fulfillment of one's duties.
The collapse of the interaction and communication between the conflicting parties
are also the dysfunctional consequences of a conflict.
Increasing hostility between the conflicting parties
as the interaction and communication decrease,
shifting the focus,
that is, giving more importance to victory in a conflict
than to solving real problems,
are also the dysfunctional consequences of a conflict.
Correct regulation of a conflict leads to functional consequences,
and if you do not find an effective way to manage a conflict,
dysfunctional consequences can occur,
that is, conditions that interfere with the achievement of goals.
During the implementation of the practical task number 1,
answer the questions of the test
and determine your behavior strategy in conflict situations.
How to manage a conflict?
The second topic of our meeting is the management of a conflict.
Let's define it.
Management of a conflict is a purposeful impact
on eliminating the causes of the conflict
or on the correction of the behavior of its participants.
The main goal is to achieve the stage of true resolution of the conflict,
that is, the situation in which the deep causes of a specific destructive conflict are eliminated.
This process begins with a clear understanding of the causes
and the definition of the evolutionary stage of the conflict.
The stages of the conflict are shown in the following slide.
The prerequisites of a conflict create conditions for the high probability of its occurrence.
When these prerequisites become the basis for a significant or emotional conflict
between people or groups, the stage of perceived conflict comes.
Of course, the perception can be marked only on one of the conflicting sides.
It is very important to distinguish between perceived and perceived conflicts.
When a conflict is felt, a person experiences tension,
pushing him to take actions aimed at reducing discomfort.
In order to resolve the conflict, all parties must perceive it
and feel the need to do something.
When a conflict is openly expressed in behavior, it is called a manifestation of a conflict.
The state of the manifested conflict can be resolved by eliminating or correcting its prerequisites.
The conflict can also be suppressed.
Suppression of a conflict does not affect the prerequisites of a conflict
and is controlled only by the manifestation of conflict behavior.
Methods of resolving conflicts.
Among the controlling influences on the conflict, the central place is its resolution.
Not all conflicts can be prevented,
so it is very important to be able to get out of a conflict.
Resolution of a conflict is a joint activity of its participants
aimed at stopping the conflict and solving the problem that led to the collision.
Resolution of a conflict involves the activity of both sides
in transforming the conditions in which they interact,
by eliminating the causes of the conflict.
To resolve a conflict, it is necessary to change the opponents themselves,
their positions that they defended in the conflict.
Often, the resolution of a conflict is based on changing the attitude of the opponents
to its object or each other.
Resolution of a conflict is a multistage process
that includes analysis and assessment of the situation,
choosing a method of resolving a conflict,
forming an action plan, its implementation,
and assessment of the effectiveness of its actions.
indirect methods of resolving conflicts are characterized by the fact
that they exclude direct interaction with the Personality.
These methods of influence are mainly on organizational conflicts
arising due to the wrong distribution of powers,
organization of labor, and the adopted system of stimulation.
Explanation of the requirements for work
is one of the best methods of managing dysfunctional conflicts.
Here, the level of results, sources of information,
and the system of powers and responsibilities should be mentioned.
Politics, procedures, and rules are defined.
Reducing the interdependence of individuals and working units.
One of the simplest ways is the separation,
which is aimed at stopping or reducing the frequency of contacts
between conflicting parties.
Conflicting units can be divided
and each of them can have a separate access to valuable resources.
Although the separation can reduce the intensity of the conflict,
it can lead to duplication of efforts
and to irrational distribution of valuable resources.
The second method is the creation of a buffer.
It can be used in cases when the input resources of one group
are the end product of another.
The classic technique of creating a buffer
involves the accumulation of commodity-material reserves, or a buffer,
between two groups to such an extent
that any excess or deficiency of the end product
is absorbed by this buffer
and does not directly affect the conflicting group.
Although this technique significantly reduces the conflict,
its broad implementation is prevented by the fact
that it increases the cost of commodity-material reserves.
This goes against the principle of delivery on time,
which is highly appreciated by the operational management today.
Preventing general goals allows to focus the attention
of potentially conflicting parties to the achievement of the desired result
for both parties.
Effective achievement of complex goals
requires joint efforts of two or more employees,
so setting such goals, which are common for all employees,
can serve as a method of preventing conflict.
For example, if three shifts of the production department
conflict with each other,
then the goals should be formulated for the entire department,
and not for each shift separately.
Similarly, setting clearly formulated goals of all organizations in general
will also contribute to the fact that the managers of departments
will make decisions that benefit all organizations,
and not only their functional area.
Hierarchy links allow to use a chain of instances
to solve the conflict.
In this case, the solution of the problem is simply passed up
the service ladder to senior managers.
Although a link to the hierarchy can have a key impact
in a specific case, this method also has its limitations.
If the conflict has a heavy and repetitive nature,
constant use of links to the hierarchy
may not lead to a final solution of the conflict.
Managers may not always recognize the true causes of the conflict
and tend to consider the majority of conflicts
as a result of bad interpersonal interactions.
Another method of changing myths and scenarios.
In some situations, it is possible to cope with a conflict
with the help of a scenario or routine behavior,
which becomes a part of the organizational culture.
Scenarios become rituals that allow conflicting parties
to release the accumulated tension
and at the same time realize their interdependence
within the framework of the whole organization.
As an example, we can give a monthly meeting
of the managers of departments,
which is held to coordinate and solve the emerging problems.
But in fact, it is a kind of forum
for reaching an external agreement.
A well-thought-out reward system structure.
The system of material and non-material rewards
can both contribute to the emergence of conflicts
and reduce the possibility of their emergence.
The reward system should be organized in such a way
as to encourage those employees,
whose actions contribute to the implementation of general organizational goals,
to try to solve problems in a complex way.
On the contrary, the reward system should not encourage employees
who are trying to solve narrow problems
at the expense of other departments and units.
For example, it should not encourage employees
to do a lot for increasing sales volume,
if they have achieved this by providing the buyers
with a wide range of discounts to the damage of the company's total profit.
Let's talk about direct methods of managing conflicts.
The following slide shows 5 ways to manage conflicts,
emphasizing cooperation or persistence in relationships.
As a rule, the true resolution of a conflict can only occur
when it is possible to identify the deep, significant and emotional reasons for the conflict
and find a solution that will allow all conflicting parties to remain in the game.
A conflict of the type of loss-loss
takes place in cases when no one gets what they want.
The deep reasons for such a conflict remain untouched,
so in the future there is a very high probability of an analogous conflict.
Persistence is almost not used in its resolution,
and the management of conflict resolution takes the following forms.
Avoidance, that is, a person simply pretends that there is no conflict
and that everything will be fine.
Accommodation, or as it is sometimes called adaptation,
includes reducing the difference between conflicting parties
and highlighting the similarity between them and the sphere of possible agreement.
Such a peaceful coexistence ignores the true essence of this conflict
and often leads to frustration and indignation.
We talk about compromise when each party sacrifices something in favor of another.
Since as a result no one gets everything he wants,
there are still prerequisites for conflicts in the future.
A conflict of the type of win-lose also deserves our attention.
In the process of such a conflict,
one of the conflicting parties achieves what it wants at the expense of the other party,
while the desire of the latter is ignored.
This is a situation characterized by a high level of persistence
and a low level of cooperation.
It can be a result of open competition,
in which one of the parties achieves victory
at the expense of strength, superiority and domination,
or as a result of authoritarian governance,
when the formal power dictates the decision,
indicating who will be the winner and who will be the winner.
The causes of the conflict are not eliminated,
and there is a very high probability of a similar conflict in the future.
A conflict of the type of win-win is characterized by a combination of persistence
and high level of cooperation.
Cooperation or solving a problem implies recognizing the fact
that all conflicting parties made some mistakes that need to be corrected.
After collecting and processing information,
a decision is chosen in the process of discussions.
Such a situation eliminates the causes of the conflict,
since there is neither avoidance nor suppression.
All these conflicting parties should see
that the decision corresponds to the goals of each of the parties,
it is acceptable for both conflicting parties.
It starts a process in which all interested parties
openly and honestly take responsibility for the facts and feelings.
Achieving such success means achieving a true resolution of the conflict.
The solution of the conflict is to solve it.
Get acquainted with the conflict situation that has arisen in the audit firm
and answer the questions of the case using the materials of our lecture.
The next topic is negotiations.
As a method of resolving conflicts,
negotiations are a set of tactical approaches
aimed at finding mutually acceptable solutions for conflicting parties.
In order for negotiations to become possible,
certain conditions must be met.
First, the existence of mutual dependence of parties involved in the conflict.
Second, the absence of significant difference in the capabilities of the subjects of the conflict.
Third, the compliance of the stages of the development of the conflict with the possibility of negotiations,
since it is still early to hold them at some stages, and at some it is already late.
Fourth, participation in the negotiations of parties
who can really make decisions in the situation.
It is believed that negotiations are only feasible with those forces
who have power in the situation and can influence the outcome of the event.
It is possible to select several groups whose interests are involved in the conflict.
Primary groups, their personal interests are affected.
They participate in the conflict themselves,
but the possibility of successful negotiations does not always depend on these groups.
Secondary groups. Their interests are affected,
but these forces do not strive for an open manifestation of their interest.
Their actions are hidden until a certain time.
There may also be third forces, also interested in the conflict, but even more hidden.
In the negotiation process, it is necessary to consider two important goals.
One has to do with the essence of the issue, the second with the relationship.
The main goals are related to the results of the negotiations.
One of the examples is the issue of the amount of the salary during the signing of a collective agreement.
The goals of the relationships are related to the results
showing how conscientiously people participate in the negotiation process,
as well as to any consequences that may arise during joint work after the completion of the negotiation process.
As an example, we can give the ability of the members of the Trade Union and representatives of the Administration
to work effectively after the completion of disputes on the conclusion of the contract.
Unfortunately, many negotiations lead to the destruction of relations,
because the parties involved are too concerned with the issues related to the essence of the issue and personal interests.
On the contrary, effective negotiations take place in cases
when it is possible to solve issues related to the essence of the issue
and at the same time preserve or even improve relations between people.
They lead to the development of common interests and joint decisions for the benefit of all parties.
Managers and group leaders should be ready to negotiate at least in three main situations.
In bilateral negotiations, the manager negotiates directly with another person.
In group negotiations, the manager is a member of a group
in which negotiations are held in order to reach a common solution.
In intergroup negotiations, the manager is a member of a group
that negotiates with another group in order to reach a solution to the problem affecting the interests of both groups.
The strategy of negotiations
The method or strategy of negotiations used can determine their final outcome.
In distributive negotiations, the emphasis is placed on the positions declared by the conflicting parties.
Each party tries to declare its rights to a part of the pie.
In integrative negotiations, which are sometimes called principled,
the emphasis is placed on the issues of benefit.
All participants try to increase the size of the pie,
and not to take a piece from it.
Using a distributive approach to negotiations, participants simply share a certain resource.
Strict distributive negotiations are characterized by the fact
that each party firmly adheres to its position.
This leads to competition, in which each party strives for domination
and tries to satisfy its own interests as much as possible.
A strict approach can result in a type of win-lose,
in which only one party remains in the win.
Otherwise, it can lead to a deadlock.
Soft distributive negotiations are characterized by the fact
that one party is ready to make concessions in order to get something in return.
In this case, one party tries to find a way to satisfy the desire of the other party.
A soft approach to negotiations leads to accommodation,
in which one party concedes to the other,
or to a compromise, in which each party sacrifices something in favor of the other
in order to achieve an agreement.
In any case, there is a kind of hidden dissatisfaction.
Even if soft distributive negotiations end in a compromise,
that is, a rapprochement of the initial positions,
there may be a feeling of dissatisfaction,
since each party did not get what they wanted.
Using an integrative approach to negotiating,
participants should ask themselves the question
how best to use the available resources.
This approach implies much less confrontation
and allows to consider a wider range of alternatives.
From the very beginning, they are much more focused on the type of winning-winning.
The foundation for achieving a truly integrative agreement
is supportive institutions, constructive behavior and good information.
Instances.
There are three instances based on an integrative agreement.
First, parties should negotiate,
feeling ready to trust the other party.
That is why ethics and maintaining relations play such an important role in negotiations.
Second, each party should be ready to share information with the other party.
Without sharing information, it is impossible to effectively solve problems.
Third, participants should demonstrate readiness to ask the other party specific questions.
This contributes to the exchange of information.
Behavior.
During negotiations, behavior has a huge impact
both on their outcome and on the overall impression that remains after their completion.
The set of skills and skills required by each participant of the negotiations includes
ability to share people and problems,
which allows to avoid emotional moments that may influence the course of negotiations,
ability to focus on interests, not on positions,
ability to refrain from premature judgments,
ability to limit the offer of alternatives and their assessment,
ability to judge a possible agreement based on an objective set of criteria or standards.
Information.
Information has a significant impact on the conclusion of an integrative agreement.
It implies that each party is familiar with the NAOS, the best alternative to the agreed agreement.
That is, each party should know what it will do if the agreement is not reached.
This means that each of the negotiating parties needs to identify and understand
their personal interests in the situation.
They should know what is really important for them,
and also understand the importance of the interest of the other party.
This may seem very difficult, but each of the parties should understand the values of the opposite party,
as well as determine when it will resort to its NAOS.
In the training of negotiations for the illustration of a distributive and integrative approach,
I often use a group in which participants are divided into two groups.
The subject of the negotiations is 100 pieces of rare African wood, the whole harvest of this year.
The number of fruits is limited, and participants will not get them anywhere else.
A separate instruction is prepared for each group.
The first group is doctors who can prepare a medicine from the seeds of these fruits
to treat an epidemic of an unknown disease, which causes the death of small children.
The second group is scientists who need to extract the pulp of the specified fruits
to continue their experience in rejuvenation.
The upcoming negotiations are the only chance to get the fruits they need.
As a rule, participants get into the most common traps leading to the failure of negotiations.
The first mistake is a tendency to defend their position in the negotiation process,
which is based on the assumption that in order to get something,
you need to take something away from the opposite side.
This myth of a fixed size of the pie is a purely distributive approach to the negotiation.
The whole concept of integrative negotiations comes from the assumption
that in some cases the size of the pie can be increased or used with maximum benefit for all parties,
and not only for one party.
Secondly, there is a high probability of escalation of participation,
since parties often start negotiations with exceeded requirements.
That is, having stated their requirements, people continue to defend them and refuse to go into the trap.
Caring for the protection of one's ego and self-preservation may lead to an escalation of the conflict.
In order to overcome this tendency in people's behavior, a firm self-discipline is required.
Thirdly, often the participants of the negotiations are too confident
that only their position is the only one that is true.
This can lead to the fact that they ignore the needs of the other side.
Sometimes the participants of the negotiations are simply unable to see the fairness of the position of the opposite side,
which is thrown into the eyes of the third-party observer.
Fourthly, during negotiations, certain difficulties can be caused by communication problems.
As stated, negotiations are a process of bilateral communication in order to achieve a joint solution.
This process can be disrupted due to communication problems,
that is, the parties do not actually talk to each other, at least do not try to speak as clearly as possible.
And this process can be disrupted due to perception problems,
that is, the parties are unable or do not want to hear or understand what the opposite side is saying.
It is most likely that positive negotiations will take place in those cases
when each of the parties is involved in active listening and asks a lot of questions
in order to clarify what exactly the opposite side is saying.
As a rule, only the analysis of the specified mistakes allows the participants of the game to understand
that there is no conflict of interests in this game.
One group needs seeds, and the other needs to crush the rare fruits.
Sometimes negotiations can be completed thanks to the interference of the third party,
especially if they go into a deadlock and, under the circumstances, the situation becomes insoluble.
When arbitration, the third party acts as a judge and has the power to make a decision
that is necessary for both conflicting parties.
The decision is made after the arbitrator listens to the positions of both parties involved in the dispute.
When mediating, the neutral third party tries to bring the parties to a decision in the negotiation process
using the method of persuasion and reasonable argumentation.
This is the usual method of resolving labor disputes,
when in order to bring the negotiations out of a deadlock,
they turn to specially trained intermediaries, acceptable for both parties.
Unlike the arbitrator, such an intermediary cannot dictate a decision.
Properly organized negotiations go through several stages in sequence.
Preparation for the start of negotiations
Before any negotiations, it is extremely important to prepare well for them,
to diagnose the state of affairs,
to determine the strengths and weaknesses of the conflict participants,
to predict the distribution of forces,
to find out who will be negotiating and what interests of which groups he represents.
It is necessary to clearly formulate the goal of participation in negotiations.
In this regard, we should answer the following questions.
What is the main goal of the negotiations?
What alternatives are available?
If the agreement is not reached, how will this affect the interests of both parties?
What is the interdependence of the opponents and how does it look like?
Initial choice of position
Usually, negotiations begin with statements from both sides about their wishes and interests.
With the help of facts and principled argumentation,
for example, the task of the company or the common interest,
the parties try to strengthen their positions.
If the negotiations are held with the participation of an intermediary, a leader, a negotiator,
then he must give each party an opportunity to express himself.
In addition, the leader determines the factors of the deterrence of the parties and manages them.
This is the permissible time for discussed issues and the consequences of the inability to compromise.
He offers ways of making decisions, a simple majority or consensus.
He also determines procedural issues.
The next stage is the search for a mutually acceptable solution.
At this stage, the parties check the possibilities of each other,
how realistic the requirements of each of the parties are and how their implementation
may affect the interests of another participant.
Opponents present facts that are only beneficial to them,
declare whether they have possible alternatives.
Here, various manipulations and psychological pressure on the leader are possible.
Seizing initiatives in all possible ways.
The goal of each of the participants is to achieve balance or slight domination.
The task of the intermediary at this stage is to see and implement possible combinations of the interests of the participants,
to contribute to the implementation of a large number of solutions,
to direct negotiations in the search for specific proposals.
In case of negotiations, the character of the one of the parties is sharp,
the leader must find a way out of the created situation, which will lead to satisfaction of both parties.
The next stage is the completion of negotiations or exit from a dead end.
At this stage, there are already a significant number of various proposals and options,
but the agreement on them has not yet been reached.
Time begins to squeeze, tension increases, a decision is required.
Since the last few concessions made by both parties can save the case,
it is important for the conflicting parties to clearly understand which concessions do not affect the achievement of their main goal,
and which ones reduce the previous work to nothing.
Get acquainted with the negotiating tactics and ways to overcome the negotiating dead ends,
and then answer the questions of the case.
The most common and common type of economic conflict is an open refusal of labor by a separate working group,
that is, a strike.
A strike in the broad sense is a collective stoppage of work undertaken in order to put pressure on those
who depend on the sale or use of labor products.
There are a number of features that any strike must include.
First, the presence of technological consequences.
This is a stoppage of the labor process, which manifests itself in the violation of the flow of materials to the enterprise,
as well as the flow of goods for consumers.
Second, a refusal to obey.
A breakdown of the social system, especially its power relations, occurs.
Third, an open expression of aggression, typical for spontaneous strikes.
Such a characteristic of a strike as visibility, entertainment, is particularly highlighted.
It includes a face-to-face relationship between mutually personified antagonists.
While some forms of conflict, for example, competition for a place in the market,
are so personified that antagonists may not even know each other.
In other words, unlike many other forms of conflict,
a strike is, firstly, an open form of conflict, secondly, personified, and thirdly, mass.
Strikes can be official or unofficial, as well as constitutional or non-constitutional.
Official strikes are considered where the trade union supports its members
in accordance with the rules of the trade union during the dispute.
A constitutional strike is one that takes place after negotiations,
following an agreed procedure and in conditions when the inability of the parties to agree is fixed.
The attitude of a strike to official or unofficial depends on who led it.
Unofficial is a strike that is not recognized by the executive committee of the trade union.
However, the peculiarity is that often strikes, starting as spontaneous or unofficial,
turn into official ones, being led by the trade union's governing bodies.
There are 9 reasons for a strike.
1. Demands to increase the salary.
2. Other disputes related to the payment of labor.
3. Working hours.
4. Restrictive disputes.
5. Occupation and questions of dismissal.
6. Other personal issues.
7. Other agreements and working rules.
8. Discipline.
9. Status of the trade union.
10. Support actions.
Only 4 of these reasons for a strike always give noticeable numbers.
These are disputes on labor payment, employment and dismissal issues, and other working agreements.
The other 5 categories give together only 10-15% of production stops.
In general, we can talk about 4 types of reasons for a strike.
1. Economic.
2. Ideological.
3. Political.
4. Psychological.
The consequences of strikes can only be partially assessed in economic terms.
The next topic is organizational stress.
Organizational stress is a mental stress associated with overcoming the imperfection of organizational labor conditions,
with high loads when performing professional duties at work in a specific organizational structure,
as well as with the search for new, extraordinary solutions in force-majeure circumstances.
Organizational stress is caused by three levels of internal organizational factors.
1. Individual characteristics of the staff.
2. Group interaction.
3. Organizational environment.
4. External or macro-medium stress factors.
In other words, organizational stress is manifested in the tension of the adaptation mechanisms of the personality
in response to a certain organizational-productive situation.
Organizational stress is also associated with role conflicts, high professional requirements,
extreme conditions of activity for certain professions, for example, pilots, astronauts, dispatchers.
The main reason for organizational stress is the presence of an internal conflict
between the requirements on the part of the organization, the attractiveness of work in it,
expectations and real capabilities of the employee himself.
The inconsistency between the personality and the organizational environment can manifest itself at several levels
– subjective, behavioral, cognitive, physiological and organizational.
The following reasons for organizational stress are highlighted.
1. A violation of the sense of comfort and safety of labor.
2. A lack of time to complete planned tasks.
3. Difficult and previously unknown production tasks.
4. Conflicts with the superior manager, with subordinates.
5. Loss of authority and managing influence on the team.
6. Long work without rest, overwork.
7. Unfair punishments.
7. Undeserved condemnation or passionate criticism.
8. Loss of reward.
A special category is the factor of high personal responsibility for colleagues and subordinates, for the common cause.
People with high responsibility are more likely to be subject to the development of organizational stress
and the syndrome of emotional burnout.
The factors of organizational stress are also excluded from active participation in decision-making.
If employees do not have the opportunity to influence important events related to their work,
they experience a sense of helplessness and loss of control over the situation.
This leads to the development of dissatisfaction with self-realization and quality of life
and, as a result, to a decrease in confidence in professional self-efficacy.
The negative consequences of organizational stress are
a decrease in work motivation and willpower,
a stagnation of personnel,
an increase in the number of unfortunate cases in production,
an increase in conflict in the team,
a decrease in productivity,
a feeling of depression and overwork,
a feeling of loneliness and dissatisfaction with life,
and many other complex experiences called stress syndromes.
The consequence of long-term organizational stress can be professional burnout.
The higher the attractiveness of work in a given organization,
the greater the confidence in career growth or stability
and satisfaction with professional self-realization and quality of life,
which is provided by work,
the less likely the organizational stress will be.
Since the early 90s of the last century,
stress at work has become one of the most relevant production problems related to health,
and employers must take the initiative in solving problems related to stress.
As the seriousness of this problem increases,
the main task of industrial and organizational psychologists
is to create healthy jobs.
How to eliminate the negative consequences of stress related to work?
First, you can reduce the intensity and number of stressors in the production environment.
Many production stressors are generated by the decisions
that are made in relation to selection and placement of personnel,
training, planning of work and creating certain working conditions.
These decisions can be made to reduce stress.
Secondly, you can take some action to change the assessment of the situation of people who have encountered stress.
For example, reorganization of production can be a strong stressor,
but this stress is largely due to fear of the unknown.
If you warn workers in advance,
and also explain in as much detail as possible how their future changes will affect them,
then such actions can eliminate or reduce their fear.
You can also use the support programs of workers,
which make books, resources, courses or consultations available to them,
to help people learn to assess potential stress situations more objectively.
Thirdly, you can take measures to improve people's ability to effectively cope with the consequences of stress.
It is well recommended to do sports, weight control,
smoking cessation and other health programs.
Two cases were given in the practical task,
published not so long ago in Harvard Business Review Russia.
Get to know them and offer your solutions to conflict situations.
Our last topic is the functions and effectiveness of conflict.
The functions of conflict are considered to be
1. Group formation
2. Establishment and maintenance of normative and physical boundaries
3. Establishment and maintenance of a relatively stable structure of inter-group and inter-group relations
4. Integration and identification
5. Socialization and adaptation of both individuals and groups
6. Obtaining information about the surrounding social environment
7. Creation and maintenance of the balance of power, in particular, power, as well as social control
8. Normativity
The special interest is presented by the functions of conflict,
which are organically associated with the main feature of the production organization.
The central features of the production organization and all its units are
external purpose and formal institutionalization.
It is these features that determine the leading function of organizational conflict.
An organization as a tool is an analogue of a fertilized work,
and an organization as a subject embodies a living labor.
Therefore, the functions of conflict interaction
make sense to consider from the point of view of the subject
for whom this organization is primarily an organizational tool of his own activity.
Such a subject can be an owner of the enterprise or a group of supporters of the main part of the stock.
It should be said right away that, firstly, not every superior organization can be a subject in relation to this.
Secondly, such an organization may not be unique.
Thus, each of them is a subject of activity for this organization in various areas
in supply and sale, in financial operations, in interaction with partners.
Each of such organizations, which is a full or private functional subject for this,
we will call a super-organization.
From this point of view, every organization is simultaneously a super-organization
for its relatively independent units that perform the functions of its tool.
A super-organization, according to its formal status,
should be located outside and over conflicting organizational structures,
and, therefore, not to take part directly in the conflict.
Often, in practice, the opposite is observed.
The super-organization's leader, and therefore the super-organization as a whole,
is involved in a conflict on the side of one of the opponents.
Such participation equals the actual statuses of the super-organization and its subordinate organization or unit,
which in any case reveals some dysfunction.
Vertical conflicts, that is, conflicts on the subordinate leader's line,
perform a diagnostic function for the super-organization.
The emergence of a vertical conflict can be a result of dysfunction.
Horizontal conflicts can also be a result of dysfunction,
or, for example, their basis is the personal qualities of the employee,
including the super-organization's leaders,
or specific interpersonal and group interactions,
which are not organizational, but develop within the organization.
However, a significant part of horizontal conflicts in the organization are not dysfunctional,
that is, they do not occur due to dysfunction and do not lead to them.
Of course, the diagnosis of dysfunction in the organization is very important,
but it can be carried out without a conflict.
A conflict is a sharp manifestation of dysfunction.
The method of detecting organizational malfunctions,
designed only for the critical, acute stage of the conflict,
is hardly a good basis for judging a conflict,
and even more so for finding positive or positive properties for the organization in it.
Next, we will turn to only horizontal conflicts,
because only they can perform a function for the organization.
A conflict is a interaction of objectives and objectives,
since the formulation of the goal of the organization is done by people.
A conflict of objectives and objectives is a conflict of possible goals and lines of organization development,
and the determinants of a conflict are the representation of incompatible goals.
But we are not talking about the fact that all future states are more progressive than the present ones.
For example, the organization can set its main goal of preserving the existing state
regardless of its public assessment or objective progressiveness.
The fact that the conflict interactions of subordinates of the organization or units,
which are partial goals and objectives of their activities,
are an indicator not only of the pre-existing history of developed dysfunctions,
but also of what can happen in the future with goals, organizations,
and individual parts with funds and other components of activities.
The indication of the future is the leading function of the organizational conflict.
It is convenient to call it a prospective one.
If the situation is recognized by the leaders of the organization,
and if they have the necessary organizational funds,
these leaders get the opportunity to manage the conflict or conflict situations,
which will ensure the movement of subordinates of the organization and units in the right direction.
The proclamation of the prospective function of the organizational conflict as a leader
and recognition of the possibility of managing conflict interactions from the side of the superorganization
with the help of organizational funds will give the basis for the disclosure of other functions of the organizational conflict
associated with this main one.
Firstly, the conflict allows to see not only the possible future of the organization,
but also the ways of achieving it both in the consciousness of people
and in the objectively existing environment, both physical and organizational.
Secondly, the organizational conflict itself is a direct creator of the future
and, first of all, of organizational norms.
Here also join the socializing and adaptation functions of the conflict.
Thirdly, since the prospective function separates the future from the present,
it makes the organizational conflict the destroyer of the existing organizational reality,
that is, the existing organizational relations, norms and values.
In this quality, regardless of the benefits that the conflict will entail in the future,
it causes negative attitude of the overwhelming majority of people
who are under the threat of its destructive effects.
It is the destructive properties, destructive abilities of the conflict
that make the attempt to determine the universal effectiveness of the conflict meaningless,
regardless of the opponents and the superorganization.
The victory in the conflict of one of the opponents
always makes the interaction ineffective for the other.
In general, it doesn't matter which of the subordinates of the organization or units
will win in the conflict.
From the organizational point of view, the outcome that leads to the achievement of its goals
and to the increase of the effectiveness of its activities.
Therefore, the determination of the effectiveness of the conflict is situational in its nature
and makes sense only in relation to a specific interaction.
Thus, the belief of many leaders is that the conflict in the production team
must be extinguished, that the work is going better
and that the better the less conflicts in the organization,
it has only an emotional basis.
And in conclusion, I would like to say the following.
Changing your attitude to conflicts practically means changing your views on life.
Try to look at conflicts in a new way,
and you will be able to confidently and even creatively find a way out of them.
A view of a problem, including a conflict, as something positive,
can be useful.
It is able to transform your thinking and help you find a solution in any governance situation.
Good luck!